One in the middle that's taken. One over
here, two over here. Maybe people in the
aisles can move in.
Any more? A couple over here.
My name is Wanda Korn. I'm director of the
Stanford Humanities Center. It's the
Stanford Humanities Center, which is a
research institute on campus dedicated to
arts and letters, that has been hosting
Joseph Brodsky's visit here this week.
This is the last of four public
presentations and many more informal ones
that Mr. Brodsky has made on campus this
week. In fact, as a matter of curiosity, I
wonder how many of you in the audience
tonight have attended another event with
our visitor this week. Thank you. For
those of you who have been able to hear
Mr. Brodsky this week, each time on a
different subject, I'm sure you would
agree that there is something very special
and unusual about about having the
opportunity to hear a gifted person give,
as it were, different pieces of himself in
a concentrated period of time. While an
exhausting marathon for our speaker, it is
extremely enriching for those on campus.
And by way of introduction, I want to tell
you how Joseph Brodsky's visit came about.
out. If you've read your program, you know
that Rhoda and Elliot Leventhal
established a new endowment last year at
the Stanford Humanities Center, one that
they specially designed to bring to campus
persons of significant achievement in
humanities and world affairs. It was the
Leventhal's idea that this visitor should
not just come, give a lecture or reading,
and go, but rather to stay long enough on
campus to have significant interaction
with students, faculty, and others in the
Stanford community. Joseph Brodsky has
been the first Leventhal distinguished
visitor and a most generous visitor he has
been. Listening to his presentations has
been rather like absorbing a cubist
painting, a new facet or layer building
each day into into a fuller portrait.
Monday, the Mount Holyoke teacher of
literature. Tuesday, the meditative
essayist that we read in the New Republic
and the New York Review of Books.
Wednesday, the seasoned and mature poet
talking about his craft. And tonight,
Thursday, the Nobel Prize winning poet and
fifth poet laureate of the United States.
I'm reminded at the end of this week of
one of the qualities Mr. Brodsky said he
admired in the poetry of Thomas Hardy and
Robert Frost a quality called expansive
motion. The expansive motion of a line.
It's continually opening out. It's a
similar expansiveness and unfolding that
so many of us have experienced this week
in the man himself. So in your welcoming
applause I hope you will pay tribute
tonight not only to the poet, artist,
teacher, philosopher who will read for us
this evening, but also include a thank you
to the Leventhals who made it possible for
him to spend this full week at Stanford.
Thank you, Joseph. Thank you, Rhoda and
Elliot.
Thank you.
Good evening.
We'll be here for about one hour, and in
the course of that hour, I'm going to read
you a few poems. Most of them I'll read to
you in English, but three or four,
presumably, I will read both in English
and in Russian. I wish actually it were
the other way around because English is
far from being my mother tongue and well,
there's plenty of accent in it. So the
only thing I can, well, I cannot hope for
you is your indulgence and I'll try to do
my level best.
Well, I would like to start. I'm not so
sure that this is a true thing that I'm
trying to say that I would like to start.
Actually, I wouldn't like to start at all.
But I think I would like, I think I will
start with the poem.
It's a somewhat oldish poem. It's the
title of this poem is Letters from the
Ming Dynasty. It consists of two parts.
Obviously, Obviously these are not the
real letters, it's a stylization. The
poem, the first part is a letter by a
woman by Kurtier, something like a lady in
waiting to her traveling faraway husband.
And the second poem is the husband's
presumed reply. Oh, you ought to know for
the purposes of the poem. well, I mean for
the purposes of better grasping what's
going on is that while the Ming Dynasty is
about the most cruel dynasty in the
history of China, it was awfully good on
the artifacts as well. The red Ming vases
are justly famous. The expression land
under heaven stands for, it's a euphemism
for the celestial empire, which is in its
own right, the euphemic name for China and
the word Li is something like one-third of
a mile in length and well hieroglyphs
obviously it's sort of some of the
mistranslation the word hieroglyph it's
always like a character. Well letters from
the Ming dynasty. I read it to you in
English and in Russian.
Soon it will be 13 years soon it will be
13 years since the nightingale fluttered
out of its cage and vanished and at
nightfall the Emperor washes down his
medicine with the blood of another tailor
then propped on silk pillows turns on a
jeweled bird that lulls him with its level
identical song. It's this sort of
anniversary, unnumbered, wrong that we
celebrate these days in our land and the
heaven. The special mirror that smooths
wrinkles even costs more every year. Our
small garden is choked with weeds, the sky
too is pierced by spires like pins in the
shoulder blades of someone so sick that
his back is all we're allowed to see.
And begins to joke. This letter to you,
beloved, from your wild duck is brushed on
the scented rice paper given me by the
empress. Lately there is no rice, but the
flow of rice paper is endless. A thousand
-lea long road starts with the first step
as the proverb goes. Pity the road home
doesn't depend on that same step. It
exceeds ten times a thousand Li,
especially counting from zeros. One
thousand Li, two thousand Li. A thousand
means thou shalt not ever see thy native
place. And the meaninglessness, like a
plague, spreads from words onto numbers,
onto zeros especially. Wind blows us
westward like the yellow tears from a
dried pod there by the wall towers.
Against it, man's figure is ugly and stiff
as a frightening hieroglyph, as any
illegible scripture at which one stares.
This pull in one direction only has made
me something elongated, like a horse's
head, and all the body should do is span
by its shadow, rustling across the wild
barleys with a blade. I know the same poem
in Russian. The letters of the Ming
dynasty.
not a happy, not a good anniversary
special mirror smoothing wrinkles every
year our little garden is born in decline
the sky is also cut with spines like a
shoulder blade and the back of a sick
person whose back we only see and
sometimes I explain to my son the nature
of the Bogdekhan of the stars and he lets
go of the joke this is a letter from you
mitad
отчитывая от о. Одна ли тысяча ли? Две ли
тысяча ли? Тысяча означает, что ты сейчас
вдали от родимого крова, и зараза
бессмысленности со слова перекидывается на
цифры, особенно на нули. Ветер несет нас
на запад, как бурые семена из лопнувшего
стручка туда, где стоит стена.
Let's switch to something else. Yeah.
Thanks.
Well, the title of the next poem is
Transatlantic.
It's a short poem.
The last twenty years were good for
practically everybody save the dead. But
maybe for them as well, maybe the Almighty
himself has turned a bit bourgeois and
uses a credit card, for otherwise time's
passage makes no sense. Hence memories,
recollections, values, deportment. One
hopes one hasn't spent one's mother or
father or both or a handful of friends
entirely as this is to hound one's dreams.
One's dreams, unlike the city, become less
populous the older one gets. That's why
the eternal rest cancels analysis. The
last 20 years were good for practically
everybody and constituted the afterlife
for the dead. Its quality could be
questioned, but not its duration. The
dead, one assumes, would not mind
attaining a homely status and sleep in
archways or watch pregnant submarines
returning to their native pen after a
worldwide journey without destroying
destroying life on earth without even a
proper flag to hoist.
The next poem is somewhat longish. Indeed,
it's a fairly long poem. It's called An
Admonition. Essentially, it's an advice to
a traveler.
Admonition.
Trekking in Asia, spending nights in odd
dwellings, in granaries, cabins, shacks,
timber abodes whose thin squinted window
panes harness the world, sleep dressed,
wrapped in your sheepskin, and do your
best always to tuck your head into the
corner, as in the corner It's harder and a
darkness of that to swing an axe over your
heavy booze laden Gerd and to chop it off
nicely Square the circle in short fear
broil cheekbones Including the moons poke
marked skin and prefer blue eyes to brown
eyes Search hard for the blue ones
Especially when the road takes you into
the wood in dates thick on the whole for
the as for the eyes One should watch for
they cut, for at your last instant it's
better to stare at that which though cold,
pyramids sink through, ice may crack, yet
wallowing in an ice hole is far better
than in honey-like viscous lies. Always
pick a house with baby clothes hanging out
in the yard. Deal only with the over-50
crowd. A hick at that age knows too much
about faith to gain anything by attempting
to bust your brain. Same thing as squaw.
hide mine in your fur coats color or if
you are traveling light in your brown
culotte under the knee but not in your
boots since they'll find the door easily
there in Asia boots are the first to go in
the mountains move slowly if you must
creep then creep magnificent in the
distance meaningless closer up mountains
about the surface standing on end the
snail like and it seems horizontal
meandering trail is in fact vertical.
Lying flat in the mountains, you stand.
Standing up, you lie flat, which suggests
your true freedom isn't falling down.
That's the way it appears to conquer. Once
in the mountains, vertigo ruptures fears.
If somebody yells, hey stranger, don't
answer. Play deaf and dumb. Even though
you may know it, don't speak the tongue.
Try not to stand out, either in profile or
full face, simply don't wash your face at
times. What's more, when the rip occurs,
throw it with a saw, don't cringe. Smoking
douse your butt with spittle and besides
arrange to wear gray, the hue of the
earth, especially under clothes, to reduce
the temptation to blend your flesh with
earth. When you hold in the desert, make
an arrow from pebbles, so if suddenly
Suddenly woken up, you grasp which way to
go in the darkness. At night, demons in
deserts try travelers' hearts. One who
heeds their cry is easily disoriented. One
steps sideways and well, said two. Ghosts,
specters, demons are at home in the
desert. You too will discover that's true
when sand creaking under your soul. All
that remains of you is your soul. Nobody
ever knows anything for a fact. Gazing
ahead at your stooping guides, sturdy
back, think that you gaze at the future,
and keep your distance, if that is
possible, from him. Since, in principle,
life also means but a distance between
here and there, and quickening the pace,
pace only when you discern the sound
behind of those running after you down the
path, with lowered heads, be they
murderers, thieves, the past. in the saw
with a frogs, a frogs, in the burned down
fume, prized indifference of things to
being regarded from afar, and in turn lose
your own silhouette, turning thus
unattainable for binoculars, gendarmes,
mass, coughing in a cloud of dust, wading
through mud, map, what difference does it
make how you would look close up, it's
even better if some character with a blade
figures out you're a stranger a bit too
late. Rivers in Asia are longer than
elsewhere, more rich in alluvium that is
murkier. As you reach for a mouthful, your
cupped fingers ladle sealed, and one who
has drunk this water would prefer it
spilled. Never trust its reflection.
Crossing it, cross it on a raft built with
no other hands but the pair you own. Note
that the gleam of campfire, your nightly
bliss, will by sliding downstream betray
you to enemies. In your letters from these
parts, don't divulge whom and what you've
seen on your way. If anything should be
penned, use your various feelings,
musings, regrets at all. A letter can be
intercepted and after all, the movement of
a pen across paper is in itself the
worsening of the break between you and
those with whom you won't any longer sit
or lie down with whom. unlike the letter
you won't share who cares why a home when
you stand on a stony on an empty stony
plateau alone under the fathomless dome of
Asia in whose blueness an airplane or an
angel sometimes sweeps up its starch or
star when you're shattered how
infinitesimally small you are remember
space that appears to need nothing does
crave as a matter of fact an outside gaze,
a criterion of emptiness, of its depth and
scope, and it's only you who can do the
job.
The title of the next poem is
a footnote to weather forecasts.
A footnote to weather forecasts.
A garden alley with statues of hardened
mud, akin to knurled, stunted tree trunks.
Some of them I knew personally, the rest I
see for the first time ever. Presumably
they are gods of local woods and streams,
guardians of silence. As for the feminine
shapes, nymphs and so forth, they look
thought-like, that is unfinished, each one
strives to keep, even here, in the future
that came, her vagrant status. status. A
cheap monk won't pop up and cross the
path. No bird song is audible, nor
moreover a motor. The future is a panacea
against anything prone to repetition, and
in the sky they're scattered like a
bachelor's clothes. Clouds turned inside
out, oppressed. It smells of conifer. This
prickly substance of not so familiar
places. Sculptures loom in the twilight,
darkening thanks to the proximity to each
other, thanks to the indifference of the
surrounding landscape. Should any one of
them speak, you would sigh, rather than
gasp or shudder. Upon hearing well-known
voices, hearing something like, the child
wasn't yours, or true, I testified against
him, but out of fear, not jealousy, petty,
20-odd-year-old secrets of pure blind
hearts, obsessed with a silly quest for
power over their likes, the best ones
among the worst ones, the executioners and
the victims. It's good that someone else's
memories interfere with your own. It's
good that some of these figures to you
appear alien. Their presence hints at
different events, at a different sort of
fate, perhaps not a better one, yet
clearly the one that you missed. This
unshackles memory more than imagination,
not forever of course, but for a while, to
learn that you've been deceived, It seems
that you've been completely forgotten all
the other way around, that you are still
being hated is extremely unpleasant. But
to regard yourself as the hub of even
negligible universe, unbearable and
indecent, a rare, perhaps the only visitor
to these parts, I have, I suppose, a right
to describe the observed. Here it is, our
little Valhalla, our long-overgrown estate
in time with a handful of mortgage souls
with its meadows where sharpened sickle
won't roam in all likelihood with abandon
and where snowflakes float in the air as a
good example of poise in a vacuum.
Well, something lighter.
The title of this poem is an epitaph for a
centaur. You know, there's a half horse,
half human creature. Richard. Epitaph for
a centaur.
To say that he was unhappy is either to
say too much or too little, depending on
who's the audience. Still, the smell he'd
give off was a bit too odious, and his
canter was also quite hard to match. He
said they meant just a monument, but
something went astray. The the womb, the
assembly line, the economy, or else the
war never happened. They befriended the
enemy, and he was left... Well, let me
start again, because it's kind of filled
up.
To say that he was unhappy is either to
say too much or too little, depending on
who's the audience. Still, the smell he'd
give off was a bit too odious, and his
canter was also quite hard to match. He
said they meant just a monument, but
something went astray. The womb, the
assembly line, the economy. Where else the
war never happened? They befriended the
enemy, and he was left as it is,
presumably to portray intransigence,
incompatibility, that sort of thing which
proves not so much one's uniqueness or
virtue, but probability. For years,
resembling a cloud, he wandered in olive
groves, marveling at one-leggedness, the
mother of immobility, learned to lie to
himself and turned it into an art for want
of a better company, also to check his
sanity. And he died fairly young because
his animal part turned out to be less
durable than his humanity.
I understand we like short and simple
stuff, don't we?
Okay, here's one example of that. One
more.
A song.
I wish you were here, dear. I wish you
were here. I wish you sat on the sofa and
I sat near. The handkerchief could be
yours. The tear could be mine, chin bound
Though it could be, of course, the other
way around I wish you were here, dear I
wish you were here I wish we were in my
car And you'd shift the gear We'd find
ourselves elsewhere On an unknown shore Or
else we'd repair to where we've been
before I wish you were here, dear I wish
you were here I wish I knew no astronomy
When stars appear When the moon skims the
water that sighs and shifts in its lumber.
I wish it were still a quarter to dial
your number. I wish you were here, dear,
in this hemisphere. As I sit on the porch,
sipping a beer. It's evening, the sun is
setting, boys shout and girls are crying.
What's the point of forgetting if it's
followed by dying?
The title of this poem is Lines for the
Winter Recess. It's for the recess of the
Congress, of the US Congress. Well, I
spent indeed the last year in Washington,
and here's the sort of a byproduct, if you
will. Though the best, I think, outcome of
a year spent in Washington in the Library
of Congress was the following two-liner,
of which I'm terribly proud. It goes like
this. I sit at my desk. My life is
grotesque.
Okay.
Lines for the winter recess. Well, it
starts with a description, with somewhat
fanciful, perhaps some of you, description
of the capital in winter.
A hard-boiled egg, cupped by the marble
cold, cracks showing its evening yoke. The
infinite avenue gobbles up cubes,
rhomboids perlilipipeds, with preglacial
appetite and simile in geometry. A
snowbound airfield is lapping the neither
milk nor honey of the meandering local
river, sluggish, reluctant to make the
ocean. Gentlemen, these are the good old
days. Your toxic up on the highway still
overtakes a hearse. A wolf flies down
eagerly with a lamb or lame duck, sighting
low temperature, green hues survive
nevertheless in the streetlights. The mow
unbundles things overseas, the richer ones
cuisine, and if stocks don't shoot up any
longer like obelisks, they still bear
resemblance to dory columns holding a
portico tight while beggars murder
beggars. Lyrical and myopic stars blink in
the winter sky like suburbia after hours,
full of prayers sensitive to elapse in
gravity but unconscious of its limits in
fact quite expanding and yet the future
surrounding your tender issue with
bathroom tiles from onana Republic or
manufactured locally is nowhere inside
this are the good old days still with the
quaint attractions with the unfinished
business since frankly even a single swarm
equals two in profile which which foils
reflection if not applause, sincere
window, past midnight, gleams, like a
Chinaman scanning the yellow pages,
stalling dreams, with their routine flat
tire, with red meat curting knives, or a
pasture, its herbivores.
And here's something different. Well, it's
a song of welcome. I should have read it
at the beginning. Song of welcome.
Here is your mom, here is your dad,
welcome to being they flesh and blood, why
do you look so sad? Here's your food,
here's your drink, also some thoughts if
you care to think, welcome Welcome to
everything. Here's your practically clean
slate. Welcome to it, though it's kind of
late. Welcome at any rate. Here's your
paycheck. Here's your rent. Money is
nature's fifth element. Welcome to every
cent. Here's your swarm and your huge
beehive. Welcome to that there is roughly
five billion like you alive. Welcome to
the phone book that stars your name.
Digits are democracy's secret aim. welcome
to a claim to fame. Here's your marriage
and here's divorce. Now that's the order
you can't reverse, welcome to it, up
yours. Here's your blade, here's your
blade, here's your wrist, welcome to
playing your own terrorist, call this your
Middle East. Here's your mirror, your
dental gleam, here's an octopus in your
dream, why do you try to scream? Here's
your corncob, your TV set, your Your
candidate suffering and upset, welcome to
what he said. Here's your porch, see the
cars pass by. Here's your shitting dog's
guilty eye, welcome to its alibi. Here's
your cicadas, the ,, the bulbs dried tear
in your lemon tea, welcome to infinity.
Here are your pills on the plastic tray,
your disappointing crisp x-ray, you are
welcome to pray. Here's your cemetery, a
well-kept glen, Welcome to a voice that
says, Amen The end of the road, old man
Here's your will, and here's a few takers
Here's an empty pew, here's life after you
And here are your stars, which appear
still keen On shining as though you have
never been They might have a point, old
being Here's your afterlife, with no trace
of you Especially of your face Welcome,
and call it space Welcome to where one
cannot breathe wreath. This way space
resembles what's underneath and Saturn
holds the wreath.
I'm going to read to you a shorter poem
now and I read to you both in English and
in Russian if I can find... Well,
it's called Breeze Marine. It's obviously,
the title is obviously pinched from
Mallarmé.
Dear, I ventured out of the house late
this this evening, merely for a breath of
fresh air from the ocean not far away. The
sun was smoldering low like a Chinese fan
in a gallery, and a cloud reared up its
huge lid like a Steinway. A quarter
century back, you craved curry and dates
from Senegal, tried your voice for the
stage, scratched profiles in a sketch pad,
dallied with me, but later, alloyed with a
chemical engineer and judging by letters
grew fairly stupid. These days you've been
seen in churches, in the capital, and in
provinces. At rights for our friends,
acquaintances now continues. Yet I'm glad
after all that the world still promises
distances more inconceivable than the one
between us. Understand me correctly
though, your body, your verbal, your
middle name now stir practically nothing.
Not that they've ceased to burgeon, but to
forget one life. A man needs at minimum
one more life and I've done that portion.
You got luck as well. Whales save in a
snapshot perhaps. Will you forever remain
free of wrinkles, lithe, caustic, vivid.
Having bumped into memory, time learns
impotence. Aptide, I I smoke in the
darkness and inhale rank seaweed.
Actually, I ruined the line here. Well, it
went, having bumped into memory, time
learns its impotence. For what it's worth,
I repeated it. Well, the same poem is in
Russian.
Dear, I came out of my house late in the
evening To breathe fresh air from the
ocean The sunset was burning in the ground
with a Chinese wind And the clouds were
like a cover of a concert piano A quarter
of a century ago You were eating with
passion to the lullaby and to the phoenix
You were drawing clouds in a notebook,
singing a little You were having fun with
me, but then you got together
The No one destroyed them. But to forget
one life, a person needs at least another
life. And I lived this fate. You were
lucky too. Where else, except for the
photos, you will always be without
wrinkles, young, cheerful, gloomy. And in
time, colliding with memory, he learns
about his immorality. I smoke in the dark
and inhale the rot from the lily.
Now you are, I'm afraid, indeed for a long
haul. Well, I...
It's a lengthy poem. It's titled, Fund the
Circle. And...
It's a lengthy poem indeed, so try to bear
with me.
The century will soon be over, but sooner
it will be me. That's not the message
though of a trembling knee, Rather the
influence of not to be on to be, Of the
hunter upon, so to speak, his fowl, Be
that one's heart valve or a red brick
wall, We hear the whiplash's fowl whistle,
Recalling vainly the surnames of those who
have loved us back, Writing in the
slippery palms of the local quack, The
world has just lost the knack of being the
place where a sofa, a foxtrot, A
lampshade's cream-trimming abodes, A risky
utterance reigns supreme. Who could
foresee time's grim eraser, Wiping them
off like some chicken's crow From an old
pod? Nobody, not a soul, Yet time's
shuffling soul Has accomplished just that.
Censurate, go ahead, Now everywhere there
are antennas, Ping-pongs, stumps instead
of trees. No chance of your sporting, No
chance of your sporting at a little cafe,
your confrere, ruined by kismet. Nor at
the bar, the silk-clad angel who failed to
soar above herself and her whiskey sour on
ice. And all over the place, people
obscure their view. Now forming a solid
mass, now a lengthy queue. A tyrant's no
longer a boogaboo but a plain mediocrity.
Likewise, a car, at last, isn't a luxury
but the means of extracting dust out of
the street where the cast iron leg of a
veteran fell silent for good, of course,
and the child is convinced that the gray
wolf is worse than infantry or the Air
Force. And somehow, your hanky, bypassing
your nose more and more often, leaps to
your organ of sight, trained on rustling
leaves, taking personally the least new
gap in the emptiness shielding fence, the
letters E.D. heralding the past tense, an
area of suspense sung by a cuckoo's voice.
Now it sounds more crude than sake of
rhodosis, approximately like, hey dude, or
at best like, you should quit drinking,
and your limp palm glides over the
decanter's skin. Though it's neither the
priest nor the rabbi that's barging in but
the air called from the circle. Black
things are in vogue, camisoles, bloomers,
hoes. When in the end you relieve your
playmate of those items, your humble house
suddenly gets lit up by something like 20
watts. But instead of an exuberant vivat,
the leaves drop a flat sorry. New times,
lamentable sorry times. Goods in shop
windows, spurting nicknames, entice us
into telling the types of things which are
managed easily from the kinds which we,
technologically behind, now equate to
mankind's ancient quest, not so much for
something that lets you save energy as for
an inanimate sort of slave on the whole
for safe anonymity. That's the logical,
though unwelcome end of multiplying, of
the demographic trend who sources neither
the Orient nor zippers but electricity.
The centuries winding down the rush of
time demanding a ruin, a victim rejects
his trash bag and a man won't wash either.
No, give it sentiments, give it ideas,
plus memories, such as times our last
sweet tooth. Well, I make no fuss and
give. I am not yellow. I am ready to play
a thing of the past, if that's so
interesting to time, eyeing absentmindedly
over its shoulder its measly catch, which
still shows some movement, though not much
else, and is still warm to touch. I am
ready to sing for good in them shifting
sands and I am prepared for the traveler,
shambling by won't focus the BDI of his
camera on me and that he won't succumb to
some powerful feeling on my account. It so
happens I can't stand, I can't stand time
that moves on, time that stands still, I
still can't stand like a solid facade
whose style echoes now a stockpile, now a
chessboard. The century was indeed not so
bad. Well, perhaps the dead run a surplus,
yet the living did did just that as well,
so substantially, in fact, that presently
they could be pickled, packed, and sealed
to attract stellar customers known for
their grand deep-freeze machinery, unless,
of course, they insist on cheese, which
could be vesicle, is arranged, the holes
in the collective memory are the proof, to
the accompaniment of air crushes in not
far off spots, the century ends, a prof
mumbles, poking his finger upward about
the atmosphere's layers, expanding the
heat, explaining the heat and attendant
fears, but not how one steers from here to
where the cumulus bulky front is suffused
with our forgive and don't forsake me,
which don't the ray interchanging its gold
into some silver row. Yet the century,
rummaging through its bureau, treats as
retro even that. Well, small wonder, the
more it ticks and tocks, the busier young
dicks, the more the antiques and relics
including the planet stuck in its orbit
and curting a sitting duck the runaway
called the suck of a comet including the
dog ear files of the fallen giant since
every bullet flies from the future which
plies its urgent trade with the present
and thus needs room now therefore no
heirloom lasts in the doory of bloom for
long at the north pole at the North Pole,
a husky barks, and a flock still twists.
In the west, they stare eastward, through
their clenched fists, making out at least
some barks, gone suddenly lively, spooked
by the forest of hands. Birds, too,
flutter and then take wing rapidly,
heading due south to its valleys, to its
minarets, turbans, palm trees, and further
down, tom-tom row, row, tom-toms row, but
the longer you scan strange features, the
more they go you. You conclude that all
over the place the kinship between plain
old dirt and, say, a great painting of the
classical sword lies, and that you won't
hurt either's original ever. That nature,
like minstrels of yesteryear longing for
carbons, like thalamus holding holding
dear black letters like a honeybee near
its hive, truly cherishes the mass scale,
profuse outputs, dreading uniqueness for
its abuse of energy, whose best guardian
is licentiousness. Space is fully settled.
Time is welcome to rub against its new
surface. I'm sure space is fully settled.
surface. I'm sure indefinitely. All the
same your eyelid is drooping only the seas
alone Remain unruffled and blue telling
the dome go on Which sounds from afar like
gone and upon hearing that one wants to
quit one's travail Shoveling digging and
board a steamship and sail and sail in
order to hail in the end not an island Not
an organism Linnaeus never found not the
charms of new latitudes but the other way
around, something of no account.
Let me see what else is here. Something
short.
It's a bit early for this poem.
It's a very simple poem. it's the Star of
Nativity in
the cold season in the locality accustomed
to heat more than to cold the
horizontality more than to a mountain a
child was born in a cave in order to save
the world it blew as only in deserts in
the winter it blows athwart to him all
things seemed enormous enormous his
mother's breast, the steam out of the ox's
nostrils, Kaspar, Baltazar, Melchior, the
team of Magi, their presence heaped by the
door, ajar. He was but a dot, and a dot
was the star, keenly, without blinking,
through pallid, stray clouds, upon a child
in the manger, from far away, from the
depth of the universe, from its opposite
end, the star was looking into the cave,
and that was the Father's Stare.
оказалось огромным грудь матери желтый пар
из воровьих ноздрей волхвы болтозар
господь мельхиор их подарки втащенные сюда
он был всего лишь точкой и точкой было
звезда внимательно не мигая сквозь редкие
облака на лежащего в яслях ребенка
издалека из глубины вселенной
Well,
I'm going to read to you two more poems.
poems. Oh, well, I'm going to read you one
more, well, several more poems.
Now I think you've just played enough
equations and you deserve to be
entertained.
Okay. Well, this This is what you're going
to hear is essentially a translation.
I translated this poem into English from,
believe it or not, from a Sumerian
language, from Akkadian to be precise.